::: {.fullPage}
::: {.twikiMiddleContainer}
::: {.twikiLeftBar}
::: {.twikiLeftBarContents}
**[WGLD](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WebHome)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   [Home](WebHome){.twikiLink}
-   [IFIP Proposal](Proposal){.twikiLink}
-   [Members](GroupMembers){.twikiLink}
-   [Meetings](Meetings){.twikiLink}

\
:::
:::

::: {.twikiMain}
::: {.toolBar}
::: {.flexMenuBar}
::: {.flexMenu onmouseover="return showMenu(event, 100);" onmouseout="return hideMenu(event, 100);"}
Page

::: {#flexMenuContent100 .flexMenuContent}
-   [Edit
    Page](http://www.program-transformation.org/edit/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?t=1536827708)
-   [Rename
    Page](http://www.program-transformation.org/rename/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings)
-   [Attach
    File](http://www.program-transformation.org/attach/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings)

<!-- -->

-   [Printable](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?skin=print.pattern)
-   [Wiki
    Source](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?skin=text&raw=on&contenttype=text/plain)

<!-- -->

-   [Rev
    4](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev=1.4)
    [(diff 3)](http://www.program-transformation.org/rdiff/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev1=1.4&rev2=1.3)
-   [Rev
    3](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev=1.3)
    [(diff 2)](http://www.program-transformation.org/rdiff/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev1=1.3&rev2=1.2)
-   [Rev
    2](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev=1.2)
    [(diff 1)](http://www.program-transformation.org/rdiff/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?rev1=1.2&rev2=1.1)
-   [Total
    History](http://www.program-transformation.org/rdiff/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings)

<!-- -->

-   [More
    \...](http://www.program-transformation.org/oops/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?template=oopsmore&param1=1.4&param2=1.4)
:::
:::

::: {.flexMenu onmouseover="return showMenu(event, 102);" onmouseout="return hideMenu(event, 102);"}
Web

::: {#flexMenuContent102 .flexMenuContent}
-   [Recent Changes](WebChanges){.twikiLink}
-   [Notify Service](WebNotify){.twikiLink}
-   [News](WebNews){.twikiLink}

<!-- -->

-   [Page Index](WebIndex){.twikiLink}
-   [Search](WebSearch){.twikiLink}

<!-- -->

-   [More
    \...](http://www.program-transformation.org/oops/WGLD/WhatWeDoAtOurMeetings?template=oopsmore&param1=1.4&param2=1.4)
:::
:::

::: {.flexMenu onmouseover="return showMenu(event, 103);" onmouseout="return hideMenu(event, 103);"}
Wiki

::: {#flexMenuContent103 .flexMenuContent}
-   [About
    TWiki](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/TWiki/WebHome)
-   [Text
    Formatting](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/TWiki/TextFormattingRules)

<!-- -->

-   [Registration](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/TWiki/TWikiRegistration)
-   [Change
    Password](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/TWiki/ChangePassword)
-   [Reset
    Password](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/TWiki/ResetPassword)

<!-- -->

-   [Users](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/Main/TWikiUsers)
-   [Groups](http://www.program-transformation.org/view/Main/TWikiGroups)
:::
:::
:::
:::

::: {.twikiTopic}
What We Do At Our Meetings {#what-we-do-at-our-meetings .twikiTopicTitle}
==========================

::: {.twikiWebTitle}
Working Group on Language Design
:::

This needs to be updated to the actual procedure that has emerged during
the meetings.

\-- Eelco Visser

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Much of the content here has been borrowed from the web site of IFIP
Working group 2.1, to which Andrew Black has been invited as an
\"Observer\". He was impressed by the proceedings at WG 2.1, and
believes that this procedure will make an excellent basis for the
Working group on design. Of course, anything here can be changed if we
find that it does not work for our group; conduct of our meetings is one
of the things that we will discuss at the business meeting that will be
held on the last day of each meeting.

[]{#Participants} Participants
------------------------------

The meetings of the Working Group provide a medium for active
researchers in this area, from all over the world, for \"comparing
notes\", exchanging not only results but also new problems and
challenges in a concentrated yet highly informal atmosphere.

Next to the members, participation is only open to invited visitors.
Visitors are selected on the basis of the perceived potential relevance
of their work to the concerns of the Design Group. Visitors are not
supposed to sit in on the meetings and \`observe\'; they are expected to
participate actively in discussions and presentations alike.

[]{#Presentations} Presentations
--------------------------------

At scientific conferences, presentations are supposed to present a
finished and well-rounded result, with emphasis on how this improves on
older results, while studiously avoiding technical detail. In strong
contrast, presentations at Working Group meetings are more about \"work
in progress\", and it is perfectly OK to present half-baked or even raw
ideas, provided that they are sufficiently inspiring.

Of course, a good talk on finished work that is central to the Design
Group\'s concerns is also welcome. However, we also welcome work that is
attempting to remake the paradigm, where it is to premature to ask for
formal definitions and inappropriate to make detailed comparisons with
prior work. Whatever the topic of a presentation, the assumptions must
be out in the open, so that all participants can follow the reasoning.
After all, we are a group of active language designers, and how a
particular result was obtained, what reasoning led to a decision, or
what motivated an approach, is often as interesting to us as the end
result. In short: the speaker gets to choose what the talk should
emphasize; the audience is entitled to expected that the story is
coherent and intelligible. If it\'s not, we encourage both visitors and
members to interrupt the speaker and ask for elucidation. However, the
goal of the interruptions must remain the interrupter\'s ardent desire
to understand and absorb the content of the talk; it must never devolve
into a contest to show how much smarter one party is than the other.

From time to time a talk may prompt an impromptu discussion between the
attendees, thus suspending the orderly progress of the presentation.
Generally the chair will allow this as long as the discussion is germane
to the higher purposes of the Working Group, but should cut it short
when it threatens to become repetitive or pointless.

[]{#Scheduling} Scheduling
--------------------------

There is no fixed duration for presentations; talks run as long as they
need and as long as there is sufficient interest, whichever of the two
is shortest. The chair will cut off talks in which there is insufficient
interest, which may take two hours or ten minutes. Clearly, under such a
regime there can be no fixed schedule for presentations. At all times
there is a tentative schedule, which is continually subject to change.
To compound the complexity of the problem, the Design Group welcomes
impromptu presentations, such as those that present a solution to an
open problem of a previous speaker, or a substantive improvement on the
prior speaker\'s approach.

The initial tentative schedule is drawn up using procedure that we will
undoubtably evolve and refine. The meeting will commence with each
attendee introducing themselves (name, affiliation, research interests),
and, optionally, giving a sales pitch, of up to 5 minutes in length, of
the presentation(s) that they would be willing to give, together with an
estimate of how much time they require for the full-length
presentation(s). The presentations can also be proposed ahead of time on
this wiki. Once everyone has introduced themselves, and their potential
presentations (if any), the participants rank the presentations they
wish to hear. These rankings are collated, and are used to determine
whether or not a presentation should be included in the initial
schedule, and how much time is likely to be allowed for it. This initial
schedule is subject to continuous revision as the meeting progresses.

\-- [AndrewBlack](../Main/AndrewBlack){.twikiLink} - 10 May 2011\
[]{#TopicEnd}
:::

::: {.twikiTopicInfo .twikiRevInfo .twikiGrayText .twikiMoved}
:::
:::
:::
:::
